[docs] - Update I/O manager concept page (DOC-129) (#19641)
dagster-io/dagster: docs/content/concepts/io-management/io-managers.mdx

  </a> guide.
</Note>

I/O managers are user-provided objects that store asset and op outputs and load them as inputs to downstream assets and ops. They can be a powerful tool that reduces boilerplate code and easily changes where your data is stored.

> Functions decorated by <PyObject object="asset" decorator/>, <PyObject object="multi_asset" decorator/>, and <PyObject object="op" decorator/> can have parameters and return values that are loaded from and written to persistent storage. <PyObject module="dagster" object="IOManager" pluralize /> let the user control how this data is stored and how it's loaded in downstream ops and assets. For `@asset` and `@multi_asset`, the I/O manager effectively determines where the physical asset lives.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Functions decorated by <PyObject object="asset" decorator/>, <PyObject object="multi_asset" decorator/>, and <PyObject object="op" decorator/> can return values that are written to persistent storage. Downstream assets and ops can have parameters that load the values from persistent storage. <PyObject module="dagster" object="IOManager" pluralize /> let the user control how this data is stored and how it's loaded in downstream ops and assets. For `@asset` and `@multi_asset`, the I/O manager effectively determines where the physical asset lives.
```

i know this is pulled from later in the doc, but I found this sentence a bit hard to parse on first read through

For non-asset jobs with inputs that aren't connected to upstream outputs, see the [Unconnected Inputs](/concepts/io-management/unconnected-inputs) overview.

---

## Basics

- [When to use I/O managers](#when-to-use-io-managers)
- [Outputs and downstream inputs](#outputs-and-downstream-inputs)
- [Built-in I/O managers](#built-in-io-managers)
- [I/O managers are resources](#io-managers-are-resources)

### When to use I/O managers

If you find yourself writing the same code at the start and end of each asset or op to load and store data, you may want to consider factoring that code into an I/O manager. They can be useful in situations where:

- Many assets are stored in the same location and follow a consistent set of rules to determine the storage path
- Assets should be stored differently in local, staging, and production environments

> - Aasset functions load the upstream dependencies into memory to do the function computation

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Asset functions load the upstream dependencies into memory to do the computation
```

I definitely wrote the first version of this bullet point but now i have no idea what I was thinking with "function computation". The basic idea I was trying to get across is that if you need to load the upstream value into memory in order to do the computation that's in the asset function, then maybe I/O managers are a good choice.

The default I/O manager, <PyObject module="dagster" object="FilesystemIOManager" />, stores and retrieves values from pickle files in the local filesystem. If a job is invoked via <PyObject object="JobDefinition" method="execute_in_process" />, the default I/O manager is switched to <PyObject module="dagster" object="mem_io_manager"/>, which stores outputs in memory.

Dagster provides out-of-the-box I/O managers for popular storage systems, such as Amazon S3 and Snowflake, or you can write your own:

- From scratch, or

> - By extending the `UPathIOManager` if you want to store data in an `fsspec`-supported filesystem

Reviewer: not quite relevant to this PR, but could we add a bullet that says
"By extending the `DBIOManager` if you want to store data in a database"

Author: Sure!
